---
layout: post
title: "Save debug info to file in Visual Studio"
date: 2022-04-13 21:55:00
categories: dotnet csharp
comments: true
---

When debugging time-sensitive applications, multithreaded applications or applications with components running in different processes, the act of placing a breakpoint can change (or break) the that the application runs. In these scenarios it can be useful to fall back to the old school way of doing things - log it out.

Here's a guide on how to log Debug info to a file in Visual Studio.

## Log to the Debug output

Using the following command you can print whatever you like to the Output -> Debug window.

```cs
Debug.Print($"You can log stuff like this: {someVariable}");
```

Whenever that line is hit, the text will get printed to the Output -> Debug window.

## Copy Debug output to Immediate window

That's great, but the Debug window buffer only has some many lines, and the output disappears if your application stops. Luckily, there's a built in way to save this information to a file... it's just not very intuitive.

The Debug output itself can't be saved, but the Immediate window can be. If only there was a way to copy the Debug output to the Immediate window...

!Insert Screenshot here!

A bit of a weird setting to have, but useful!

## Saving the Immediate window to a file

So we've got our application spitting out text to the Debug output and we're copying that output to the Immediate window. How do we save this to a file?

In the Immediate Window, enter the following command:

```
> Tools.LogCommandWindowOutput /on C:\temp\captains.log
```

This will start the logging operation. Everything that's output (or input) into the Immediate Window will be saved to the log file.

NOTE: The `>` is required! It signifies that this is a [Visual Studio Command](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/visualstudio/ide/reference/visual-studio-commands), rather than a debug operation.

The filename is optional. If you don't specify a filename, the log file will be created in the user's profile folder with the name cmdline.log. If a file with the same already exists, new log info will be appended to the end of the existing file.

The `/on` flag starts the logging. The `/off` flag stops the logging:

```
> Tools.LogCommandWindowOutput /off
```

Et Voila. You now have your debug info in a log file, saved to your hard drive for you to analyse at your leisure. 
[Log Command Window docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/visualstudio/ide/reference/log-command-window-output-command)
